# Why Accounting

All right. So why accounting at all? What, what is, what is the purpose of doing accounting in the first place?

Yeah.

Well, the classic definition of accounting is a measurement, processing and communication of financial and nonfinancial information from entities such as, uh, businesses or corporations. And it's called the language of business because it provides information and a consistent comparable and trustworthy manner so that we can make intelligent management decisions. So there are different types of accounting that are very specialized to the different types of goals that you're trying to accomplish. So there is tax accounting for to be able to figure out what the appropriate number and amount of taxes are, audit accounting, uh, to be able to, uh, go through and make a determination of the current status of the business. Financial accounting, the one we traditionally understand and most associate with a profit and loss statements and balance sheets and cash flow statements, a forensic accounting when we're trying to determine fraud or misuse of funds, uh, and so on.

And so on. The point of it is that we develop different types of accounting systems that are specifically tailored to the goal that we're trying to achieve in the business. So while the, so while we may concern ourselves with double entry accounting and the appropriate statements and the cost principle of accounting, uh, and uh, different accounting principles, uh, debits and credits and Goodwill, uh, at the end of the day, the thing that really matters is that we want to be able to have a system on which we can rely so that we can make smarter management decisions because you can't manage what you don't measure. And in the case of innovation, if you measure wrong, it directly leads to you managing wrong. And so the fundamental reason why we need accounting is it's set puts together a set of organizing principles that allows us all to work on the same page that we can have that effective management, that effective corporate governance. And that's what we're seeking to do, set up an effective governance structure that is completely aligned to the goals that we're trying to achieve.

Because accountancy is more than, it's not just the reporting itself. It provides that basis of management. And what are we managing? Well, we're managing the resources as a firm. We're managing the, uh, the human resources of the firm or managing the capital, the firm. And if we don't have a system that is appropriately set up to, to address and look at those things that are the most important to manage and manage them effectively, then we're going to get bad results. Right? So we've already discussed in the prior chapter this concept of NPV and what NPV really looks at. And rewards are very detailed, believable fabrications. And again, I'm not saying that in a negative sense, but they are, they are by definition, fabrications. You make it up because you don't have any data on which to base any real decisions. And so the NPV analysis is designed to reward those fabrications that are the most believable and the most, uh, most, uh, most acceptable to those persons who are currently in charge of the company's strategy.

When we look at innovation accounting, we want to change that approach. You want to change that approach from saying, I have predicted the future accurately to, I don't know what the future is. It's my job to go find that out and to make an accurate reporting of what the near term future looks like so that we can make those smart management decisions. And so innovation accounting is designed to produce that system very directly. Now let's talk a little bit about different types of innovation. And I think that it's important that we, so why does it matter to get this entire structure? Right? Well, let me tell you a story that happened. Hopefully we'll, we'll explain this a little bit further. So I was once doing a workshop at a large industrial manufacturing firm, very successful, huge, from hundreds of thousands of employees. And we were holding this workshop to demonstrate some of these lean startup principles about how we will move fast to be able to, uh, innovate quicker, uh, where there is conditions of high uncertainty.

So he showed a lot of the typical things that we do, AB testing, MVPs of fairly classic things. But at the end of the presentation, uh, uh, one of the attendees came up who is this again, 20 year veteran of the industry said, look, love what you're doing. Love this concept. I've seen it done the other way. It's a disaster. We really want to appreciate what you're trying to accomplish here and we want to put these things into practice. Um, but I've got a problem, right? Because I put together this concept for this idea and I'd go to finance to get it cleared. And finance says, okay, great. What's the ROI? Right? And so what do I, what do I want to, I tell them because in the course of our, our presentation, when the presenters said, don't give them one, it's a trap. And for the reasons that we've discussed about why NPV is a trap, Oh, that is completely true.

Would you could see the blood drain from this guy's face because there's just no way in hell that he was going to go to finance and say, I'm not giving you an ROI. It's just there's no, there's, there's no practical situation where that actually will happen. Right. And so of course without providing any alternatives. And at the time, this is where the innovation accounting actually came from. My concept for it was that we have to give that product manager any answer, right? Because they've got to give something to finance that finance will accept and agree and then finance is going to be able to send it over to legal and make sure that it gets cleared by legal. And then we're going to have to go to HR and make sure that they have the right human resources and the right people on the team to be able to do that.

And that eventually is going to go to marketing to make sure that marketing is acceptable with it. And you have to put together this entire governance structure, uh, with every system within the company. Every function has to be on board with this approach. Um, and if they are not, then they're either going to fight it in direct or subtle in indirect ways such as sabotage or simply not giving it the time and attention it deserves because it doesn't align to the goals they're trying to achieve. And so this whole concept of innovation accounting, this whole concept of a overall governance structure is to ensure that we have all of the different parties that are responsible for making innovation successful, aligned towards the same goal and not just at the high level. It's our mission to be an innovator and everybody's an innovator and we've got to innovate or die or grow or die.

Like all of that is true, but unless it's backed up with the actual accounting and corporate governance structure in the firm, then it's just going to be treated as the pablum that it is. So if we as organizations are not, are not going to create this set of corporate governance accounting structure that is consistent, that is comparable, that is recognizable, that is understandable, that is verifiable, right? That can be communicated in a, in an effective way. All the fundamental principles that create an accounting system, we can't just wave our hands and say, well, it's important to innovate and not deal with any of those details. And that's, that's why the accounting system is important because if we're measuring and counting and verifying and reporting and communicating these concepts and ideas in a consistent manner that aligns with the goals that we're trying to accomplish, then we have the, the pre-courses that are absolutely necessary for success, not sufficient, uh, not uh, uh, but absolutely necessary conditions for us to ultimately be successful.

Having the appropriate accounting, uh, corporate governance system means that you set up the systems in such a way that it focuses the attention of the firm on the goal that you're trying to accomplish. People do what they are paid to do if their main function and main job is to produce reliable profits for the firm as part of their overall product that they're managing. That's where their attention and their, their energy are going to be focused. And if somebody says an Oh, by the way, you've got to innovate on top of that, but I'm not going to give you any way to be able to measure success or, or have it contribute to your overarching career goals. There shouldn't be any shock, not even a little bit when we don't get that with any reliable consistency to the firm because people do what they're paid to do. So, so they accounting structure that aligns to the goals that we're trying to accomplish to try to make the unknowns known as opposed to just trying to guess better the next time.


gets us closer to the way of that reliable, consistent, verifiable community capable accounting system that will enable innovation to become a more systematized process. So it's less about being willing to accept a 95% failure rate and instead saying, how do we improve that so that we can produce more reliable growth opportunities for the firm and help prevent or forestall disruption from new technologies, regulatory changes, market entrance, and other types of forces that are constantly putting the firm at disruptive pressure.

