# Confusion Matrix


This is where option-focused and traditional innovation performance management diverge.  The former is concerned with what’s true and what’s false, regardless of whether a proposal is accepted or rejected.  In the option model, the True Positive and the True Negative are equally valid.  We are trying to avoid error, the False Positive and False Negative.  In the traditional approach, there is only Positive and Negative: only projects that are going to work from the outset are even considered.  Why would you invest in something with a negative return?  Thus, all of the emphasis is placed on knowing the answer before you begin, which under conditions of uncertainty is impossible by definition. 

Ultimately this all manifests itself in compensation.  In the option model, employees should be rewarded for the True Positive and True Negative, and rebuked for the False Positive and False Negative.  Unfortunately, to traditional managers who live in a world of predictability (see here) getting rewarded for not pursuing a course of action simply is nonsensical.  To them, the answer is always there: it’s just a question of being smart enough to uncover it.  
This is where the model ties into the concept of the Three Horizons.  If innovation is viewed through the lens of growth Execution only, then yes the results must be judged on the one-dimensional basis of success or failure.  If, however, innovation is considered Exploration then we just the conclusions based on what’s True and False.  

The decision to enter H2 is binary: you do it or you don’t.  Then the results of that decision are accurate or innaccuate.  Thus, binary classification tree.

98% of innovation is unmeasured.


A


The important thing to note here is that we’re concerned with testing.  If you make the argument “But we considered this and the answer was no” but never did anything then you’re missing the point.  Deal with facts, not suppositions.  

Moreover, innovators shouldn’t be judged on Success alone.  


Moreover, since testing doesn’t produce the “highest return” it will consistently lose out to projects that demonstrate — only on paper, mind you  — larger scale and thus, higher NPV.  Remember that finance needs to decide where to spend the scarce resources of the firm.  One PM is saying a project is worth $100M, backed by industry trends, expensive analyst reports and a detailed spreadsheet analysis with monthly revenues for ten years; the other PM is saying “we want to conduct small-scale testing that might produce something someday” — who do you think gets funded? 


This is why NPV is so dangerous.  When the truth axis is removed from the matrix; the only acceptable  outcome is “success”.  Thus, any indications that success is not forthcoming — even for reasons beyond our control — are suppressed. This leads to false positive failures in scope far greater than necessary since we continue to apply resources in hopes of eventual success.  This is how small failures turn into colossal disasters — it is the direct consequence of our funding regime.


with NPV it’s critical that future profits be predicted accurately or the entire model collapses.  For established businesses with a well-known customer base, mature market, and years of sales history we have knowledge on which to build our forecasts — but discontinuous innovation have none of these things.  A ten-year revenue forecast for non-existent products in non-existent markets built entirely on assumptions is absurd on its face — and yet routinely serves as the basis for multi-million dollar innovation bets.

The plain and simple truth is until we *learn* how a product performs in a market we know nothing.  No matter how smart we are, no matter our “expert” credentials, no matter how complex our spreadsheets, we are simply making assumptions about the future.  If those assumptions turn out to be wrong the project fails, which is the obvious down-side to innovation.



The problem resides in how innovation is financed.  Traditionally, an innovation project’s ROI is determined through a discounted cash-flow analysis, most often Net Present Value (NPV.)  To calculate an NPV, an innovator forecasts all future profits, discounts the total by the cost of capital, and then subtracts the total investment required.  This results in a single number which represents the value of the project in today’s dollars. 

NPV has many advantages:  it’s simple to calculate, comparable between competing projects, and fundamentally intuitive.  However, since it rejects any investment that does not assume success from the outset (ie, a positive NPV) it  requires us to make the most critical decision at the precise moment we have the least information.  Moreover, since all ideas are competing for the same resources, innovators are encouraged to make larger revenue projections with correspondingly larger investments to produce a larger NPV — representing a greater ROI than their colleagues’ proposals.  Combined with inflated discount rates to compensate for the increased risk of innovation, which forces innovators to increase their revenue projects further still to get above the NPV threshold.  These and other factors combine to create what I call the NPV Death Spiral that contributes to the inordinately high rate of failure in innovation projects. 

An NPV analysis only considers the “Positive” axis.   Again, ideas that are not predicted to be successful produce a negative NPV and as such are rejected prima facia.  They never receive funding and thus never get tested; the idea lives and dies on the original assumptions with no followup learning.  Thus, only GO projects are ever measured at all, and only along the one-dimensional axis of Success and Failure.  Wholly ignored is the “Negative” axis even though all four potential outcomes directly affect the firm. 


Yet disruptive ideas will never pass an NPV analysis.  They will be ignored precisely *because* they are disruptive.  These ideas only make sense in hindsight, which is why they must be tested and measured in order to avoid the False Negative error our conventional filters are otherwise likely to produce.


, we set ourselves up to wail the entrepreneurs’ lament: “I thought of that years ago!”

# Engines

Twitter is an instructive example here.  After a few years innovating, Twitter hit their growth engine and ran it effectively for many years.  During that time, they tried a variety of profit engines — sponsored tweets, timeline inserted ads, etc., to uncertain results.  However, their growth eventually stalled, and investors came calling.  Their initial response was to replace the CEO with one of the original founders who  promised more growth.  However, that growth failed to materialize, and investors balked at continuing to fund Twitter’s ongoing losses.  Twitter responded by cutting nearly 10% of the workforce and cancelling high-growth projects with uncertain profit engines.  With the renewed focus, they recently posted their first quarterly profit, and while the stock price has yet to return to anything close to its all-time highs, it does seem to be effectively completing the H2/H1 transition.
The growth phase starts the Race: you must find profitability before growth slows. As long as you continue to grow at a quick pace investors will be very forgiving.  However, once the rate of acceleration slows (the second derivative turns negative, for you calculus geeks) if you have not found a sustainably profitable model the pressure will start building.  If growth itself stalls out and you still haven’t reached sustainability then significant contraction (or outright cessation) will follow.   H2 is the only phase with this dual-focus of executing  growth while exploring profit.

We can now see why measuring by costs is wrong.  Let H3 be H3.  Measure option value.

<!-- Baton pass for transitions? -->

---

# Where you are
Figuring out where you are in the lifecycle curve is one of the very first tasks you should accomplish.  Again, each lifecycle demands a particular set of metrics, systems, people and tools; in order to know that you have proper alignment with each you must be certain you are tuned to that particular phase.
It's worth noting here that we can not artificially hasten the product lifecycle simply by apply the tools for a different quadrant.  Hiring a former Fortune 500 executive as CEO will not bring your company to the Fortune 500 any more than the cargo cults of the Pacific Isles brought airplanes by building runways.  (In fact, it’s likely to make things much worse because that person is likely to employ approaches that are relevant to mature products and not innovations.)
The easiest test I've discovered for identifying which phase you're in relates to systems and operations.  If your systems are constantly breaking down, then you're in the acceleration phase.  While in the mature phase, products don't break constantly because when they do people get fired.  And while in the innovation phase, products don't break because no one is yet using them.  Only in the acceleration phase do we see 'duct tape and tin foil' patchwork solutions to address the breakdowns that come from rapid scaling.
As a concrete example, when working with a client I noticed a large room filled with people nearly stacked on top of each other, all working on the same project.  When I asked their role, the response was, "Oh, they are all re-entering the invoice data from the sales system to the production system.  We haven't had time to integrate them.". Again, classic response to hyper-growth: this was a miserably inefficient use of resources, but it was all they could to keep things together.




Three things interest us about this chart:  the first is that scale should follow certainty.  A typical initiative in a larger firm will produce a false certainty, leading to large-scale systems development and ultimate failure.  Don’t scale into uncertainty.
Second is that if we aren’t going to scale, then we need to test.
Finally, while we need both growth and profit engines to create a sustainable businesses the growth engine comes first.



generally happens over a period of time.  As knowledge of the profit engine is achieved, the overall system stabilizes and starts returning cash.  With their investment finally paying off, financiers begin to demand more stability, and exploration gives way fully to execution.  Managers replace the leaders, and the Race becomes the Grind.


<!-- Traditional: there is no difference between H3 and H2 — they are synonymous.  This is what’s wrong.  The H3 period is missing.  OR we treat H3 as just prep time to H2.  We need a proper H3.  Let H3 be H3. -->


As the summary chart shows, each phase has distinct goals, metrics, systems, talents — and if the governance doesn’t match the needs we wind up driving towards the wrong outcome.  For instance, if you put a manager in charge of H3 they will often be paralyzed by the uncertainty; measure an H2 project by costs and you lose market share to competitors; have fragile systems in H1 and the profit engine doesn’t run smoothly.  Understanding the horizons means understanding the different needs and goals of each phase and aligning your governance accordingly.

---

Before getting into the details of horizons themselves, some context:  when referring to the horizons, I’m referring to the individual products within the firm, not the firm itself.  Also, the model is reserved for discontinuous innovation with non-linear growth capacity (as opposed to continuous innovation.)  Finally, we must remember that success is never guaranteed; not every product makes it but those that do take a logistic, not linear, path.  With those boundaries, let’s describe the horizons.

---

To better understand horizon strategy, let’s use a slightly different chart, this time representing the current goal of each horizon.  When in H1, the goal is profit — our focus should be on executing our business model to generate that profit reliably.  Similarly, in H2, our goal is growth, and that should be our focus of execution.  In H3, we’ll put the traditional goal of prep.  These are the primary objectives for each phase.

While implicit, it’s worth stating clearly that the ultimate objective is to get to — and remain in — H1 as long as possible.  We don’t want to stay in H2 or H3 longer than necessary; they are merely steps along the path.  Thus, we’ll add a second row underneath the first to be explicit about the next immediate goal while we’re in a particular horizon.

Since H1 is the ultimate goal, it makes sense that the “next” square underneath would be empty; there is no next since we’ve arrived at our destination.  It also makes sense that while we are growing in H2 we must be sure that profiting from that growth is the next step; otherwise what is the point of growing?  Finally, while in H3 our next immediate step is to take the product into the growth phase.  This completes the entire lifecycle showing us the current goal we must maintain, and the next goal we need to achieve.
There are some other things we can deduce from each stage.  If we’re currently in a phase that’s working then we obviously know it works.  And it’s equally obvious that we assume we’ll accomplish whatever the next goal is  — otherwise there would be no point in continuing with the current task.  So we can rename the rows from the goals of “Current” and “Next” to where we stand in respect to those goals:  “Know” and “Assume” respectively.  With that reframing, we might start to notice something odd about the chart.

---


But in H3 what do we actually know?  Sure, we’ve written a business case, run our financials, conducted some research, written an MRD — but these are just our growth *assumptions*.  We can’t know something is going to grow until it’s actually released and growing (or not).  So we’ll need to edit that cell.

Now our chart is a more accurate reflection of reality.  At the beginning, we know **nothing**.  All we have are assumptions about the future.   But it also begs the question that is at the center of every innovation disaster:  if we know nothing, then what are we prepping for?

Ultimately, certainty drives scale.  When we know things work, we can make them work more and bigger and better.  When we don’t know, we shouldn’t scale into uncertainty.  It’s absolutely possible to be right with our assumptions, but facing an average failure rate of 95%+ this is demonstrably unwise.  Instead, our goal should be to maximize our learning; we want to turn our assumptions into knowledge at the highest possible rate.


---

We can see from the summary chart how each phase is tailored to achieve its intended outcome.  While incomplete (and, as I’ve hinted, inaccurate for at least one column) the crucial point is that each phase is distinctly different from the other.  Different goals, systems, processes and people suggest different strategies be applied to each phase, which we’ll discuss now.

---
# Failure Conditions

This is how we arrive at the single-most prevalent mistake that is made in innovation projects: scaling into uncertainty.  Again, innovation projects are typically approved on the basis of research such as the Total Available Market, theoretical growth projections, industry expert analysis, and of course “the pitch”.  These efforts are designed to provide the image of certainty, but knowledge is derived not from making our assumptions more complicated, but by testing them.
Assumptions treated as knowledge.  This is the failure condition.  It leads us to treat H3 as H2.
Ultimately this becomes the test of your innovation strategy: if you believe the future can be predicted and you just need to find smarter people to do that job, then please put down this book and go for it.  If, however, you are willing to concede that for discontinuous innovations the only way to gain knowledge is by testing assumptions against reality, then H3 looks considerably different.
# Exploration as a Skill
In H3, we want know what will grow.  Knowledge means that we test our assumptions to find out what is true, and what is false.  If things are true, we should pursue them; if false, we should not.  And this means that the value from H3 comes from the ability to choose.
I’m not going to discuss *why* we make this mistake with frightening regularity — that’s for another chapter — but I do want to drive the point home that the traditional ‘prep’ goal of H3 is the strategic error that results in ultimate innovation failure.  If our assumptions about our growth engine turn out to be wrong — as they are 95% of the time — then we are merely prepping for failure.
If we are only testing assumptions, then by definition the answer might be no.  This means that value derives from the ability to choose; if the choice must always be “yes” then the value can only come from our prognostications.   We don’t want ‘visionaries’ who claim to see the future; we want explorers who are comfortable venturing into the unknown.
This is why Horizon 3 innovation should be valued in terms of the optionality it represents.  Costs can only be justified if there is an eventual payoff.  This inevitably leads to scaling into uncertainty, since the only way to justify high-risk initiatives is to increase the future payoff.  Options, in contrast, don’t need to be exercised to have value.  Their value comes from delaying investment decisions until more information Is available.  Rather than trying to become better fortune tellers, we should become better at turning our assumptions into knowledge; ie, learning.

---

When I start a workshop with a new audience, I ask a question fairly early on: what is your track record innovating in new markets? How often are you right about your assumptions?  The answer varies — mostly dependent on whether the boss is in the room — but the most common answers range between 3-5%, aligning with the 95%+ failure rate of most startups.

---
There's a few things that we want to be able to draw from this. The first is that there are different stages in the product life cycle and they all need to be handled differently. Just like you wouldn't feed steak and wine to a baby and dress them in a three piece suit, nor should you expect your product that is in that, that initial stages of just after birth to expect to return a profit. The whole point of having different accounting schemes that relate to different stages of the product life cycle is that you can align that corporate governance structure to the goals that you're trying to achieve. Now to most organizations, the primary objective, in fact, the goal and the thing that dominates everything about their their,

now when you look at the product life cycle, it breaks down into three broad categories, the very highest function, right? So if we look at the end, the end is that we clearly have profit. That's the goal. That's what we're looking for. That's what we're trying to achieve and that should be the ultimate objective for any product that is designed to function stably. Within an organization, right? And in this profit stage we have a number of metrics that we typically will use to measure that profitability, gross margin, return on invested capital, IRR, internal rate of return. These are all measurements of the profitability of any particular product line and we can see that that's the ultimate goal and we want to get to that profit stage and stand that profit stage for as long as we possibly can. Now prior to the profit stage, we have the growth stage, right?

Because for something to be profitable, it has to have some bass, it has to exist in some volume, right? You can't get profit from flatline. So there has to be this period of growth that proceeds the profit phase, right? And very often we're losing money during that growth phase because we want to achieve some strategic positioning in the marketplace. Something that will mean that the profits that we get later will be greater and greater still. And therefore in the short term near term, we're willing to sacrifice our overall profitability for the sake of growth. And that's what dominates this middle phase of the product life cycle. Um, uh, if, if we have profitability, that's fantastic, but we're never going to, um, but fundamentally we're typically wants to make a greater degree of investment in growth. And so in this phase, we typically like to look at, um, growth metrics, uh, uh, growth trajectory, lift of a number of degree of channel partnerships, revenue growth, user growth, market share.

Uh, these are all the types of things that we're looking to do to, uh, not make ourselves as profitability as we can because we expect that will come later, but that we're willing to make that investment in growth so that we have a strategic position in the marketplace that is as strong as it possibly can be. And most of the startups that we think about, uh, that are in the news are these sort of high flying growth opportunities that, that are, that are taking the world by storm. So your Airbnbs, your Uber's, uh, from consumer product, uh, uh, like the Swiffer or other products that sort of come in and uh, rapidly take over there, uh, take large amounts of market share and that's a very expensive proposition. But still we have this growth trajectory that we can measure, um, because we can see it, like we can see those overall sales metrics, right? Okay. So, uh, what comes before that? Of course, before it can grow, it has to exist. And so that's where we have this development phase or this innovation phase where we're taking the product, we're designing it, we're getting the idea, we're investing in it, we're building it, we're making prototypes. Um, and then we're having this, uh, this, uh, that period that ends with this big watch, right where we launched the product and then boom, it takes off, uh, up into the right, the hockey stick of growth, right? And so

that

characteristic approach is actually what drives that NPV analysis that we did in the future, right? We get this large period of money. We have nothing but losses because the product hasn't been released yet. We're developing it. The assumption is that everything that we're developing there will then have this high growth, this high hockey stick of growth where we're going to have, uh, expansive sales, expansive revenue growth events. It's unit sales growth that will eventually then, uh, turn into, uh, reaching a level of profitability later on down the line.

Yeah.

And that is what is the product life cycle is what dictates that NPV, net present value approach. And fundamentally it's a hack that we're using to be able to say, well, the reason that I can lose money in the near term on all of these products is because it will eventually will produce a much larger return in the future. Otherwise, why would we do it? Right? So why is the product lifecycle import? Well, first and most important, it helps us understand the primary objective, the primary objective of almost any company in their primary DNA, what, what is in their sort of core.

Okay.

Competency is everything that happens in the profit stage of the product life cycle, right? It's where most products exist. It's where they want to stay for the longest period of time and it generates the profitability. That is the whole reason for existence of the firm. So without the profit, nothing else matters. And so consequently it comes to dominate everything that the firm thinks about. And so the firms tend to, once that profit starts coming in, the firms tend to orient around that operating principle, keep the money coming in. We don't want anything to disrupt that flow. We want to be stable, we want to be predictable. We want to have no perturbations, no mistakes, no surprises. Just keep making your money as much as you possibly can, right? And it's not that we don't expect growth in this third phase, like, yes, we clearly still want to be able to continue to grow and expand our marketplace.

But the key factor here is that we will never sacrifice profit for the sake of growth. Once you reach this final mature stage in the product life cycle, there is no more going back to suddenly losing millions and millions or even in some cases like Uber, billions of dollars, uh, for the sake of growth. It just simply is not tolerated anymore. Because you have this large apparatus, you have this large existing customer base. People have come to rely on your product, people have come rely on your profitability, the stock market is expecting it. And if you suddenly start losing money, they're going to say, wait a minute, why are, why are we even continued to be in this business? And then of course, furnace will go out of business. So that should really be like 70 to 80% of the company's focus and resources and time and energy and effort are all focused on that concept of um, maintain the maximum profitability.

Uh, get the money, keep the money and keep making the money. Whatever you do, don't lose money. Right? And that tends to dominate. Now, um, there are products of course, that will then exist higher degrees of growth and we want new growth opportunities. And of course the, the, uh, smart and savvy operator will understand that well, even though I have profitability now, that won't last forever. And so I need to have something that's going to take the place of my existing profitable, uh, products. And so they're willing to invest and take some of those profits and set aside them for investment in these other products that then have large of growth, right? But even though they're willing to sacrifice the profitability for the sake of growth, they can still measure that growth. They can still see where that growth will eventually turn to profitability. Right?

And so even though the metrics may be changed from, uh, not, not profitability to more growth metrics such as market share, uh, market penetration, uh, year over year, quarter over quarter over growth numbers, um, as long as that growth continues to be up into the right, they're going to be willing to entertain that. But it still has to maintain this degree of, of profitability, uh, predictability and manageability. And, and we can see where we're going and yeah, maybe a little crazy, maybe a little hectic and we might be losing money, but there is definitely still a way to understandably and predictably manage the process. And more importantly, when that growth fails to materialize for whatever reason, then you can see that, okay, we've got a problem here. And so both of those functions, which between the two of them tend to focus on 90 90 to 95% of the company's attention, time and resources.

They still fit within these relatively well understood and predictable buckets. And so what happens before that during this development and innovation phase, prior to the launch, before we have the ability to create any tube to see any of the actual growth that can take place in the marketplace. What do we do? Well, of course as we saw from chapter one, we saw that we use NPV and this hack to say, okay, well I can see the future and the future tells me I'm going to make a lot of money. And for all the reasons that we mentioned, you know, what initially sets up those, those forecasts and we tried to do our best, but fundamentally we're saying the money that we're spending now in this development and innovation phase, we're wanting to now measure our success, uh, by, by what we do against those plans that we sent.

And so the only thing that we can really track here as we can see from the product life cycle curve are our costs, right? And so this produces a certain degree of conflict because if the people that approved the plan said, okay, well I'm going to need to see future growth in order to justify the money that you've taken. Uh, if you cannot show and they do not have faith that that is going to eventually materialize. If you don't both share the same vision, the shame story, both believe in the same fabrications, then what they can only see and measure are the costs. Because the costs of the only thing that at this point are quantifiable because we clearly don't have any sales. We don't have any growth. Obviously if there's no sales growth, we can't have any profit that comes even later still. So the only thing that we can see at this early stage are the costs that are associated with the product. And that creates this incredible tension because costs work directly against profitability, obviously for the firm as a whole. And so, um, the firm tends to view these things with a great deal of suspicion,

but it's actually more than that

because

the overall DNA of the firm on the right side of this line is predictability and measurability and, and exceeding expectations and working to plan and making sure that there's no disruptions, nothing that's taking our existing situation and shaking up the box. Whereas everything on the left side of the equation is exactly shaking up the box

moving to MPV hack.

And so we can see that the MPV hat is fundamentally saying, well this is our delayed growth. It's our, we're still going to be measuring you by growth, but we're willing to give you some delay factor because we, we clearly know that that can't, you can't demonstrate that growth until that product is in the marketplace. So we're going to have this delayed growth and that's how we're going to measure your success. So in effect, you don't really have this development phase at all. You really have this growth phase and this profit phase and projects that are funded are too hot through this significant degree of money. They have an expectation of growth, it must happen. If that growth does not happen, then that project is a failure and when we are doing innovation in a sustain an incremental basis, we can make those predictions with some reasonable certainty. But when we try to make those into the case of uncertainty where we have substantial growth opportunities, then we can't have that degree of certainty. And so this is the break, this is the tension, this is the problem that exists and it's built into the product life cycle.

Now sometimes companies tried to get around this by saying, well everybody's an innovator and that's just as wrong, if not worse than doing the delayed growth because we don't want people to innovate in the profit stage. We don't want people to move fast and break things. We don't want them to take chances. The company is making huge amounts of money. We want to keep that money going. And so the whole point of the product lifecycle discussion is to say, look, we've got three high, high level functions that the company is trying to engage in, let do their job. If the product is a highly profitable product, let's focus on the profitability, stability, predictability, forecasting, budgeting, cost controls, all those things that are focused on the question of profitability. Let profits do its job. And when we get to the growth fees, the sort of craziness, the silliness that can be associated with these things that are happening really, really quickly, don't try to force profitability on them instantaneously.

We want to allow them to get as much of the market share as they possibly can so that they can create that strategic positioning and dominance and have those places where they can create sustainable competitive advantage. So let growth be growth, let profit be profit, let growth be growth. And then most critically, let innovation be innovation. Don't make innovation into this delayed growth mindset that is forced upon you from the NPV or discounted cashflow based accounting regimen. Allow it to do its job or it can move fast or it can break things where it can take chances and we do not have an expectation of success, but instead are creating the opportunities for the firm to be successful. So what we're ultimately seeking is that the firm is intelligent about the corporate governance structures that they use profit facing for profitable products, growth facing for growth products and innovation facing for innovation products. Yeah. Part of the problem that makes this difficult is that the product life cycle is also a one way street.

It's just like life. Once you move into a different phase of operation, then you have to be governed by the metrics that are demanded by that phase of the operation and you cannot go backwards. Things that are profitable can't suddenly start losing massive amounts of money. Things that are growing can't suddenly stop growing. And the only place where this is fundamentally different is in the innovation phase because innovation has not started down that path yet. And the critical thing to keep it from starting down that path is to make sure that the funding regimen, that it is tailored to the goal that you're trying to achieve. Once you have these large scale million multimillion dollar investment, you can't suddenly look at that as an experimental project. That degree and type of investment demands that it eventually produce a return. And again, this is where the, the NPV based approach comes into conflict with the goals that you're trying to achieve

because it forces you into this growth phase prematurely because the growth phase is dictated by the degree of investment that you receive. So now that we've completed this concept of the product life cycle, we understand that we have profit for profit row for growth, and we now need innovation metrics for the innovation phase. The key difference in any innovation accounting corporate governance regimen is that this initial phase has to switch from becoming this development and launch vehicle where the product is being built and being prepared for this big bang launch and changing into an experimental option development phase where perhaps we continue and have this product transition into growth and perhaps not. And to do so at a funding level that is appropriate for the task that we're trying to accomplish.

